README.md, before:

# 8085-Assembler

A simple Python based 8085 assembler.

## Usage
```
usage: assembler.py [-h] [-L] [-A] [-B] [-I] [-H] [-C] [-s] [-b] [-t] [-o OUT] source

A simple 8085 assembler.

positional arguments:
  source             source file

options:
  -h, --help         show this help message and exit
  -L, --lineNum      include the line number in output
  -A, --address      include the address in output
  -B, --label        include the labels in output
  -I, --instruction  include the instructions and arguments in output
  -H, --hex          include the hex code in output
  -C, --comment      include the comments in output
  -s, --standard     equivalent to -A -B -I -H -C
  -b, --bin          outputs only binary data
  -t, --trs100       creates basic loader for TRS-80 Model 100
  -o OUT, --out OUT  output file name (stdout, if not specified)
  ```
## Source File Syntax
The assembler is case sensitive.

### Comments
Comments begin with semicolons.
```asm
mvi A, 0x5C ; This is a comment
```

### Constants
8 and 16-bit constants are given in hex. 8-bit constants must have two digits, and 16-bit constants must have 4-digits.
```asm
mvi A, 0x0C
mvi A, 0C   ; The "0x" is optional
mvi A, 'a'  ; letters can be used as input, usage is ascii
mvi A, 7    ; Illegal. 8-bit constants must have two digits

lxi H, 0x03B7
lxi H, 03B7    ; The "0x" is optional
lxi H, 3B7     ; Illegal. 16-bit constants must have four digits
```
If an 8-bit constant is given where a 16-bit constant is expected, the 8-bit constant will be converted to a 16-bit constant, with the upper 8-bits all zero.
```asm
jnz 0x3FC7  ; Jump-not-zero to 0x3FC7
jmp FF      ; JMP takes a 16-bit argument, but given 8-bits. Will JMP to 0x00FF
```

### Label Definitions
Label definitions may be any string ending with a colon, where the string does not match the pattern of an 8 or 16-bit constant.

```asm
  ; Example
  ;*******************************************************************************
        mvi A, 0x5C
  Foo:  dcr A         ; Label definition
        jnz Foo       ; Jump-not-zero to Foo
  ;*******************************************************************************
        mvi A, 0x5C
  FD:   dcr A         ; Illegal. Label definition cannot match hex constant format
        jnz FD
```
### Directives
#### org <16-bit-address>
Sets the origin to the given address. Only forward movement of the origin is permitted.
```asm
; Example
;*******************************************************************************
        mvi A, 55
        out 42
        jmp Start
 Start: org 0x44
        mvi A, 32
        out 42
;*******************************************************************************
; Assembles to the following:

Address             Label               Instruction         Hex Code            
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
0x0000                                  mvi A, 55           0x3E                
0x0001                                                      0x55                
0x0002                                  out 42              0xD3                
0x0003                                                      0x42                
0x0004                                  jmp START           0xC3                
0x0005                                                      0x44                
0x0006                                                      0x00                
0x0044              START:              mvi A, 32           0x3E                
0x0045                                                      0x32                
0x0046                                  out 42              0xD3                
0x0047                                                      0x42  
```
```asm
; Example
;*******************************************************************************
      org 0x44
      mvi A, C7
      out 44
      org 0x00      ; Illegal. Cannot move origin backwards
      jmp 0x0044
```

#### DB <8-bit-data>, ...
Writes one or more data bytes sequentially into memory.
```asm
; Example
;***********************************************************
      mvi A, 33
      db     0x44, 0xFE, 0x9C
      hlt
;***********************************************************
; Assembles to the following:

Address             Instruction         Hex Code            
------------------------------------------------------------
0x0000              mvi A, 33           0x3E                
0x0001                                  0x33                
0x0002              db                  0x44                
0x0003              db                  0xFE                
0x0004              db                  0x9C                
0x0005              hlt                 0x76  
```

#### DM "<8char><8char>...
Writes one or more char bytes sequentially into memory. At the end 0x00 can be added with \0.
Some of the ASCIIZ control charactgers are supported.
```asm
; Example
;***********************************************************
      mvi A, 33
      dm "Hello\0"
      hlt
;***********************************************************
; Assembles to the following:

Address             Instruction         Hex Code            
------------------------------------------------------------
0x0000              mvi A, 33           0x3E                
0x0001                                  0x33                
0x0002              dm                  0x48                
0x0003              dm                  0x65                
0x0004              dm                  0x6C                
0x0005              dm                  0x6C                
0x0006              dm                  0x6F                
0x0007              dm                  0x00                
0x0008              hlt                 0x76                
```

#### \<symbol> EQU <8 or 16-bit number>
Equates a symbol with a number.
```asm
; Example
;***********************************************************
      foo equ 0xC5F3
      mvi A,  33
      lxi H,  foo
;***********************************************************
; Assembles to the following:

Address             Instruction         Hex Code            
------------------------------------------------------------
0x0000              mvi A, 33           0x3E                
0x0001                                  0x33                
0x0002              lxi H, FOO          0x21                
0x0003                                  0xF3                
0x0004                                  0xC5      
```
#### DS <8 or 16-bit number>
Defines and reserves the next n-bytes for storage.
```asm
; Example
;*******************************************************************************
            jmp END 
Storage:    ds  0x05
            lda Storage
END:        out 42
;*******************************************************************************
; Assembles to the following:

Address             Label               Instruction         Hex Code            
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
0x0000                                  jmp END             0xC3                
0x0001                                                      0x0B                
0x0002                                                      0x00                
0x0008              STORAGE:            lda STORAGE         0x3A                
0x0009                                                      0x03                
0x000A                                                      0x00                
0x000B              END:                out 42              0xD3                
0x000C                                                      0x42              
```

## Expressions
Anytime an instruction or directive requires a numerical argument, an expression can be used. Supported operations inside expressions include addition and subtraction. The location counter $ is also made available. Expressions may contain symbols, but must resolve within two passes of the assembler, and if used for directive arguments, must resolve in a single pass. All expressions must evaluate to a positive number.
```asm
; Example with expression resolution in one pass.
;***********************************************************
      foo    equ   10
      mvi A, foo - 04
;***********************************************************
; Assembles to the following:

Address             Instruction         Hex Code            
------------------------------------------------------------
0x0000              mvi A, FOO - 04     0x3E                
0x0001                                  0x0C     

```
```asm
; Example with expression resolution in two passes.
;***********************************************************
      mvi A, foo + 04
      foo    equ   30
;***********************************************************
; Assembles to the following:

Address             Instruction         Hex Code            
------------------------------------------------------------
0x0000              mvi A, FOO + 04     0x3E                
0x0001                                  0x34
```
```asm
; Example with expression resolution in two passes, and $
;***********************************************************
      mvi A,  55
      jmp $ + foo
      foo equ 05
      db  $,  $ + 01, $ + foo
      ds  02
      hlt
;***********************************************************
; Assembles to the following:

Address             Instruction         Hex Code            
------------------------------------------------------------
0x0000              mvi A, 55           0x3E                
0x0001                                  0x55                
0x0002              jmp $ + FOO         0xC3                
0x0003                                  0x07                
0x0004                                  0x00                
0x0005              db                  0x05                
0x0006              db                  0x07                
0x0007              db                  0x0C                
0x000A              hlt                 0x76    
```

Commit message:

For TRS-80 Model 100:
Split BASIC lines into maximum of 40 numbers each.
Change default filename to "DEFLT" because "DEFAULT" was too big
Conditionally run "new" or "SAVEM" after poking the program into memory.

README.md, after:

# 8085-Assembler

A simple Python based 8085 assembler.

## Usage
```
usage: assembler.py [-h] [-L] [-A] [-B] [-I] [-H] [-C] [-s] [-b] [-t] [-o OUT] source

A simple 8085 assembler.

positional arguments:
  source             source file

options:
  -h, --help         show this help message and exit
  -L, --lineNum      include the line number in output
  -A, --address      include the address in output
  -B, --label        include the labels in output
  -I, --instruction  include the instructions and arguments in output
  -H, --hex          include the hex code in output
  -C, --comment      include the comments in output
  -s, --standard     equivalent to -A -B -I -H -C
  -b, --bin          outputs only binary data
  -t, --trs100       creates basic loader for TRS-80 Model 100
  -n, --trs100_new   runs 'new' after poking Model 100 program into memory
  -S, --trs100_save  in the Model 100 program, SAVEM the binary file
  -o OUT, --out OUT  output file name (stdout, if not specified)
  ```
## Source File Syntax
The assembler is case sensitive.

### Comments
Comments begin with semicolons.
```asm
mvi A, 0x5C ; This is a comment
```

### Constants
8 and 16-bit constants are given in hex. 8-bit constants must have two digits, and 16-bit constants must have 4-digits.
```asm
mvi A, 0x0C
mvi A, 0C   ; The "0x" is optional
mvi A, 'a'  ; letters can be used as input, usage is ascii
mvi A, 7    ; Illegal. 8-bit constants must have two digits

lxi H, 0x03B7
lxi H, 03B7    ; The "0x" is optional
lxi H, 3B7     ; Illegal. 16-bit constants must have four digits
```
If an 8-bit constant is given where a 16-bit constant is expected, the 8-bit constant will be converted to a 16-bit constant, with the upper 8-bits all zero.
```asm
jnz 0x3FC7  ; Jump-not-zero to 0x3FC7
jmp FF      ; JMP takes a 16-bit argument, but given 8-bits. Will JMP to 0x00FF
```

### Label Definitions
Label definitions may be any string ending with a colon, where the string does not match the pattern of an 8 or 16-bit constant.

```asm
  ; Example
  ;*******************************************************************************
        mvi A, 0x5C
  Foo:  dcr A         ; Label definition
        jnz Foo       ; Jump-not-zero to Foo
  ;*******************************************************************************
        mvi A, 0x5C
  FD:   dcr A         ; Illegal. Label definition cannot match hex constant format
        jnz FD
```
### Directives
#### org <16-bit-address>
Sets the origin to the given address. Only forward movement of the origin is permitted.
```asm
; Example
;*******************************************************************************
        mvi A, 55
        out 42
        jmp Start
 Start: org 0x44
        mvi A, 32
        out 42
;*******************************************************************************
; Assembles to the following:

Address             Label               Instruction         Hex Code            
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
0x0000                                  mvi A, 55           0x3E                
0x0001                                                      0x55                
0x0002                                  out 42              0xD3                
0x0003                                                      0x42                
0x0004                                  jmp START           0xC3                
0x0005                                                      0x44                
0x0006                                                      0x00                
0x0044              START:              mvi A, 32           0x3E                
0x0045                                                      0x32                
0x0046                                  out 42              0xD3                
0x0047                                                      0x42  
```
```asm
; Example
;*******************************************************************************
      org 0x44
      mvi A, C7
      out 44
      org 0x00      ; Illegal. Cannot move origin backwards
      jmp 0x0044
```

#### DB <8-bit-data>, ...
Writes one or more data bytes sequentially into memory.
```asm
; Example
;***********************************************************
      mvi A, 33
      db     0x44, 0xFE, 0x9C
      hlt
;***********************************************************
; Assembles to the following:

Address             Instruction         Hex Code            
------------------------------------------------------------
0x0000              mvi A, 33           0x3E                
0x0001                                  0x33                
0x0002              db                  0x44                
0x0003              db                  0xFE                
0x0004              db                  0x9C                
0x0005              hlt                 0x76  
```

#### DM "<8char><8char>...
Writes one or more char bytes sequentially into memory. At the end 0x00 can be added with \0.
Some of the ASCIIZ control charactgers are supported.
```asm
; Example
;***********************************************************
      mvi A, 33
      dm "Hello\0"
      hlt
;***********************************************************
; Assembles to the following:

Address             Instruction         Hex Code            
------------------------------------------------------------
0x0000              mvi A, 33           0x3E                
0x0001                                  0x33                
0x0002              dm                  0x48                
0x0003              dm                  0x65                
0x0004              dm                  0x6C                
0x0005              dm                  0x6C                
0x0006              dm                  0x6F                
0x0007              dm                  0x00                
0x0008              hlt                 0x76                
```

#### \<symbol> EQU <8 or 16-bit number>
Equates a symbol with a number.
```asm
; Example
;***********************************************************
      foo equ 0xC5F3
      mvi A,  33
      lxi H,  foo
;***********************************************************
; Assembles to the following:

Address             Instruction         Hex Code            
------------------------------------------------------------
0x0000              mvi A, 33           0x3E                
0x0001                                  0x33                
0x0002              lxi H, FOO          0x21                
0x0003                                  0xF3                
0x0004                                  0xC5      
```
#### DS <8 or 16-bit number>
Defines and reserves the next n-bytes for storage.
```asm
; Example
;*******************************************************************************
            jmp END 
Storage:    ds  0x05
            lda Storage
END:        out 42
;*******************************************************************************
; Assembles to the following:

Address             Label               Instruction         Hex Code            
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
0x0000                                  jmp END             0xC3                
0x0001                                                      0x0B                
0x0002                                                      0x00                
0x0008              STORAGE:            lda STORAGE         0x3A                
0x0009                                                      0x03                
0x000A                                                      0x00                
0x000B              END:                out 42              0xD3                
0x000C                                                      0x42              
```

## Expressions
Anytime an instruction or directive requires a numerical argument, an expression can be used. Supported operations inside expressions include addition and subtraction. The location counter $ is also made available. Expressions may contain symbols, but must resolve within two passes of the assembler, and if used for directive arguments, must resolve in a single pass. All expressions must evaluate to a positive number.
```asm
; Example with expression resolution in one pass.
;***********************************************************
      foo    equ   10
      mvi A, foo - 04
;***********************************************************
; Assembles to the following:

Address             Instruction         Hex Code            
------------------------------------------------------------
0x0000              mvi A, FOO - 04     0x3E                
0x0001                                  0x0C     

```
```asm
; Example with expression resolution in two passes.
;***********************************************************
      mvi A, foo + 04
      foo    equ   30
;***********************************************************
; Assembles to the following:

Address             Instruction         Hex Code            
------------------------------------------------------------
0x0000              mvi A, FOO + 04     0x3E                
0x0001                                  0x34
```
```asm
; Example with expression resolution in two passes, and $
;***********************************************************
      mvi A,  55
      jmp $ + foo
      foo equ 05
      db  $,  $ + 01, $ + foo
      ds  02
      hlt
;***********************************************************
; Assembles to the following:

Address             Instruction         Hex Code            
------------------------------------------------------------
0x0000              mvi A, 55           0x3E                
0x0001                                  0x55                
0x0002              jmp $ + FOO         0xC3                
0x0003                                  0x07                
0x0004                                  0x00                
0x0005              db                  0x05                
0x0006              db                  0x07                
0x0007              db                  0x0C                
0x000A              hlt                 0x76    
```
